---
layout: single
permalink: /about
title: "About Me"
author_profile: true
---

![image-right]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/portrait.png){: .align-right}

Hello! My name is George, and this is my personal website. I'm a PyData
ninja[^1], machine learner, math enthusiast and coffee ~~snob~~ lover. (I also
really like sushi.)

I believe in dismantling and reassembling every idea I come across, instead of
lukewarm-learning just enough to get the next job done. I believe that there
isn't anything too difficult to learn, because everything was (and will be)
conceived by ordinary people like me, not magicked out of the aether. I believe
in common sense, reasonable decisions and disciplined hard work instead of
~*~following my dreams~*~ and ~*~doing what I love~*~. In short, I believe in
summitting mountains as much as the next guy - but I also believe that the best
way to do that is to not fall into the pothole right in front of you.

I'm currently a senior at [The Cooper Union](http://cooper.edu/welcome) in New
York, studying for a BSE in general engineering. I'm also a two-time
quantitative research and data science intern at
[Quantopian](https://www.quantopian.com/) in Boston, where I help power research
analytics and open-source software for the algorithmic hedge fund.

[Click for my Resume](https://github.com/eigenfoo/eigenfoo.xyz/raw/master/assets/documents/resume.pdf){: .btn .btn--primary .btn--default}

## What's with your username?

It seemed like a clever pun at the time... but people keep asking, so maybe not.

_Eigen_ is a German for _own_, but probably a better translation (especially for
math terms like
[eigenvalue](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eigenvalues_and_eigenvectors)) would
be _beloning to_, or _characteristic of_. For example, an eigenvalue is the
value _belonging to_ a matrix, or _characteristic of_ a matrix.

_Foo_ is a [placeholder name in computer
programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foobar), and is basically a techier
version of "blah" or "thing".

So taken together, `eigenfoo` probably means something like "things
belonging to [George]".

---

[^1]: A title I feel is sufficiently vague to avoid lying by saying I'm a "data scientist", yet sufficiently specific to conjure images of Python and data science :smiley:
