---
title: Reddit Clusters
excerpt: ""
link:
header:
  teaser: 
  overlay_image: 
  caption: ""
  last_modified_at: 05-14-2018
---

Have you heard of `/r/TheRedPill`? It's an online forum (a subreddit, but I'll
explain that later) where people espouse an ideology revolving entirely around
gender. "Swallowers of the red pill", as they call themselves, maintain that it
is _men_, not women, who are socially disenfranchised; that feminism is
something between a damaging ideology and a bellwether of societal retardation;
that men should actively assert themselves over their female peers. It might not
come as a  surprise that most users on /r/TheRedPill are men.

Despite being shunned by the world (or perhaps, because of it), `/r/TheRedPill`
has grown into a sizable community and evolved its own slang, language and
culture. Let me give you an example.

```
Cluster #14:
Cluster importance: 0.0489376285127
shit: 2.433590
test: 1.069885
frame: 0.396684
pass: 0.204953
bitch: 0.163619
```

This is a snippet from a text clustering of `/r/TheRedPill` - you don't really
need to understand the details right now: all you need to know is that each
cluster is simply a list of words that appear together a lot in Reddit posts and
comments. Following each word is a number indicating its importance in the
cluster, and on line 2 is the importance of this cluster to the subreddit
overall.  As it turns out, this cluster has picked up on a very specific meme on
/r/TheRedPill: the concept of the shit test, and how your frame can pass the
shit tests that life (but predominantly, bitches) can throw at you.  There's
absolutely no way I could explain this stuff better than the swallowers of the
red pill themselves, so I'll just quote from a post from /r/TheRedPill and a
related blog.  The concept of the shit test very broad: … when somebody "gives
you shit" and fucks around with your head to see how you will react, what you
are experiencing is typically a (series of) shit test(s).  A shit test is
designed to test your temperament, or more popularly, your frame: Shit tests are
used to "determine your frame." Frame is a concept which essentially means
"composure and self-control." …if you can keep composure/seem unfazed and/or
assert your boundaries despite a shit test, generally speaking you will be
considered to have passed the shit test. If you get upset, offended, doubt
yourself or show weakness in any discernible way when shit tested, it will be
generally considered that you failed the test.  Finally, not only do shit tests
test your frame, but they also serve particular, critical social function: When
it comes right down to it shit tests are typically women's way of flirting.  …
The main reason is that it gives women a degree of emotional stimulation. Plus
there's the fact that most men buckle to women's shit tests and don't respond in
kind. This demonstrates a lack of social acumen and emotional maturity. Those
who "pass" show they can handle the woman's BS and is "on her level", so to
speak. This is where the evolutionary theory comes into play: you're
demonstrating her faux negativity doesn't phase [sic] you and that you're an
emotionally developed person who isn't going to melt down at the first sign of
trouble. Ergo you'll be able to protect her when threats to her safety emerge.
If you want to learn more, I took all the above quotes from here and here. Feel
free to throw yourself down that rabbit hole (you may want to open those links
in Incognito mode).  Clearly though, the cluster did a great job of identifying
one meme/motif from /r/TheRedPill. In fact, not only can clustering pick up on a
general topic of conversation, but also on specific memes, motifs and vocabulary
associated with it.  Interested? Read on! Below I explain what asdfasdfasdf.
